:title: Improving Dry Bean Field Breeding
:org: Paul Gepts' Lab, UC Davis Department of Plant Sciences
:website: http://www.plantsciences.ucdavis.edu/gepts/geptslab.htm
:location: Davis, CA, USA
:skills: mechanical design

The Problem
===========

Background: The Paul Gepts lab comprises a diversified group of researchers
studying the breeding and genetics of dry beans (common beans such as black
beans, kidneys, and pintos as well as lima beans and garbanzo beans).  Field
work comprises a large portion of our research, since it is the best way to
study the physical traits of the bean plants that are of interest to us. We
also plant field trials because they are the most informative for farmers in
our central valley region who are interested in growing the new bean varieties
that we breed for production.

Field Equipment: Although we are working in a modern age where we can use
genetic insights to select for disease resistance, growth habit, and other
desirable traits, we are still working with farm equipment that was built and
developed in the 1940s.  Although most of this equipment is in relatively good
condition for its age, we are not using it for the purposes for which it was
intended.

As breeders and geneticists, we have a large number of field plots that are
small in size but which must be harvested and kept separate for accurate yield
estimates and for genetic purity. The harvest equipment which we are using was
developed for much larger fields and therefore has design features which are
appropriate for the type of plant we are harvesting but which are not
appropriate for the way we must use the machine. For example, the clutch of our
CB Hays Standard harvester is highly stressed by the fact that we must
constantly engage and disengage it to clean out the machine between our ten
foot plots; in seven acres, we have nearly 2,000 of these plots which must go
through the harvester in a harvest month. Under the harvest situation for which
this harvester was designed, the clutch would only have to be engaged once for
that entire area. The CB Hays harvester also has no reverse, and can clog with
plant materials if it is not fed properly or if a plot is too green; in th is
case the machine needs to be shut down completely, and the machine must be
unclogged with hands and knives, sometimes delaying the harvest crew for half
an hour or more.

There is no header on either of our harvesters, which means that the very large
and cumbersome bean plots must be lifted either by hand or with a pitchfork
into the harvest machines.  This places a great deal of ergonomic stress on the
harvest crew, who may perform these activities for two months or more, five to
seven days a week, for four to eight hours a day during the fall harvest
season.

The inefficiency of the harvest creates an extended harvest period, and
therefore contributes to a lack of uniformity in yield data, and in a normal
year of precipitation, the length of our harvest could make our current harvest
system unfeasible. The bean plots must be thoroughly dry for the harvest
equipment to function correctly, and early fall rains could ruin our fall
harvest (an all of our yield data) at any time.

Other harvest problems: Contamination by chaff (the unwanted part of the plant
that is not seed), and dirt clods.  After harvest, our bean seeds currently
have to be sent through multiple machines to clean them for accurate weighing
and safe storage. Modern harvesters for the seed breeding industry often have
built-in screens and blowers to clean the plot while it is being harvested in
the field and then weigh it automatically as it is being deposited into a bag.
Perhaps there is a simple way to add some or all of these onto our current
harvesters to reduce the months of labor it now takes to clean the seed after
harvest.

Desired Outcomes: Creating a more mechanized and ergonomic way to cut, lift,
thresh, clean, and weigh our bean plots. Even a small improvement in any one of
these steps could greatly expedite the speed of our field harvest, lead to more
accurate data and improve seed purity, reduce labor costs and the risks of
injury due to poor ergonomics, and increase our potential field research
capacity.

Contact Information: The winter season is a slower time for us, so I would be
happy to mentor any students/student group interested in trouble shooting our
harvest problems. There may also be potential for developing high throughput
phenotyping systems for summer data collection if there is student interest in
projects of that sort.
