:title: Automated Native Plant Plug Planting
:org: UCD Arboretum
:location: Davis, CA, USA

For native grassland restoration, the typical sequence of events in the Fall is
to disk a field, wait for the first germinating rains, spray the field with
herbicide to kill the non-native grasses, then seed with native grasses which
germinate and grow with subsequent Winter rains. However, with the drought and
future climate change impacts, we have found that this previously reliable
method has less success. The lack of an initial rain for germination, or the
initial rain being of such intensity that we are unable to get equipment into
the field for the first spraying, has made it much more difficult to establish
native grasslands.  We have found that the best response to these new
conditions is to plant the grasses as already-grown plugs. The plugs have
better chance of survival, a greater planting window, and a developed root
system. However, they are very labor intensive to install, with a laborer
needing to first create a hole with a dibble, then to push an individual plug
into the hole. Automation of plug planting would greatly increase the success
and scale of native grassland restoration when climatic conditions are not
optimal for seed germination.  Automation exists for agricultural crops, such
as tomatoes and lettuce, but not for grass plugs. The ideal solution would be
something that could be used in small and large areas, is potentially scalable
from a few thousand to tens of thousands of plugs, can handle slight inclines,
and is either self-propelled or can be pulled on a medium-sized quad or small
tractor.

Required Skills/Interests
=========================

mechanical design, agriculture
